seriously it's a very hard line to walk
as a as a mental health professional in
terms of like what do you hold people
accountable for and what do you like
give people a pass on welcome to day
three
of the goal setting and motivation
curriculum for healthy gamer coaches so
let's start by
kind of recapping what we covered so far
so day one was an introduction and we
sort of talked a little bit about our
model of um how we approach goal setting
and motivation and the crux of it is
that so the key points of like goal
setting and motivation is that generally
speaking
there's an abundance of information
about like how to become motivated
available to people but that access to
that information does not actually like
catalyze behavioral change right there
are so many youtube videos about
motivation and yet everyone is not out
there you know crushing it day after day
after day after day and so why is that
there are many reasons for that we
explored a couple of different things
but you know the biggest reason that
i've sort of discovered is that
motivation is not like a monolithic
thing it's not like a binary thing where
you have motivation or you don't have
motivation that that if you look at
human beings engaging in behavior there
are three discrete
parts of that the first is the intent
and so like why they want to do the
thing the second is the resistance so
when i try to do something like
something is going to get in the way
right so if i need to study and i don't
feel like it like i don't feel like it
is actually like a sign of something
going on in my mind
so there's intent there's resistance and
there's the actual action
and so we sort of shared this model with
you because
it's our belief at healthygamer that
good diagnosis precedes good treatment
we're not really diagnosing anything
medical here but i think that's just a
way of sort of sharing this principle
that you have to understand a problem
before you can fix it and so a big
problem that i notice when you look at
things like the internet is everyone
talks about how to fix motivation right
they everyone offers solutions but what
they don't do is like tailor those
solutions to your specific problems
so as a coach the real value add in your
mission your dharma
is to help clients figure out like why
aren't they motivated like where's the
actual problem so that you can leverage
some degree of like understanding and
fixing
it second day we talked about intent
right so intent
is a really really important piece that
people will set goals for themselves and
the reason that they don't meet those
goals is because internally like who
they are doesn't really align with the
goal that they set so we sort of
discovered that when i you know when i
say to myself i want to do something or
this is a goal that i have to set for
myself that that goal can come from any
number of or four different places
within myself
it can be a desire and desires are born
of the indriyas or the sense organs so
what i mean by this is like if i want to
play a video game like you know i don't
know that people in 1200
ce like 800 years ago really cared about
the launch of wow classic
i don't think that they had any desire
to play wow classic and i know it sounds
kind of silly like duh so then if you
think about it where does the desire to
play wow classic comes from it comes
from a sensory experience that gives you
the idea oh look there's wow classic so
a desire comes from a sensory experience
or the memory of a sensory experience
another good example of this is when i'm
walking down the street and i smell like
you know someone cooking something it
can be like oh wow that smells amazing
now i want to eat it
so that's a desire
so a lot of times what will happen is
our our clients will have goals based on
seeing what other people are doing
they're like oh look at that person on
instagram they are so happy i wish i had
that as well they'll read about things
on the internet oh like look at this
person is like so happy i wish i had
that as well so those are desires the
next thing that tends to drive a lot of
people is the idea of should so they
have this like preconceived notion based
on once again observation of the
external world or different kinds of
pressures or societal constraints
um that will sort of tell them what they
should be and they they strive to be
that thing it's not what they want to be
and i'm not talking about desire
um it's not actually something that they
care about or value it's something that
society or their environment is telling
them that they should do and that can
actually work for driving behavior
sometimes right so
as the desperation of
not failing out of college i shouldn't
fail out of college and as that kind of
emotional energy builds up and i hit
that last minute panic i can actually
study because i should be studying right
now and so there are ways that shoulds
can drive behaviors but what we really
discover is that sustained progress
towards your goals
tends to happen when people align their
goals with like internally what feels
good to them
and those are their values and their
duties
so these are the things that you owe
people that you feel obliged to do like
in service of your duty and the cool
thing about duty is that generally
speaking
negative things
will prevent us from engaging in a
behavior unless it's aligned with duty
so when something is hard and i want it
i won't actually do it but when
something is hard and it's my duty to do
it i will do it so this is a really
fundamental thing about human behavior
that generally speaking negative things
will will prevent us from engaging in a
behavior unless it's aligned with a duty
and then somehow something weird and
magical happens and this is sort of the
paradoxical uh raising awareness of the
negative this is how this kind of plays
in that when you kind of acknowledge the
negative if it's kind of aligned with
your duty it can actually drive people
to do it and you'll kind of recognize
this we see like negative manifestations
of this in the world
when we sort of like think about people
who have martyr complexes right so these
are people who like because of the
martyr complex like they're willing to
they view themselves as a martyr and
that really drives their behavior right
i'm willing to take one for the team i'm
willing to be a martyr and and even the
idea of martyr is someone who like dies
for a cause right so something really
really powerful there that has existed
within like humanity for thousands of
years that something about like i was
reading about a monk for example who
like apparently like did some kind of
self-immolation is political activism
and if you kind of think about that like
that's absolutely insane right what
would drive someone to put themselves
through so much public
suffering and like so much intense
suffering
and and it's like it's because they did
it for a reason
so you know we would definitely don't
self-immolate yourself you know like
that's a terrible idea but as coaches
what we can actually help people do
is align their goals with their duties
and their values and the cool thing
about that is once you help people move
from like one of those quadrants to the
the next quadrant
what you'll see is like an increase in
motivation and people actually being
able to not be held back by negative
things
so we talked about the four you know the
the model of four different intents we
talked about conflict between these
different boxes and this is what
ambivalence is right so ambivalence is
like yeah i don't want to play this
video game today but i do
so anytime people are stuck in clients
are stuck they're not stuck
for no reason they're stuck because they
have a goal that has a positive you know
thing it's like yeah like i absolutely
want a yacht that would be awesome if i
had a yacht like that would be great
it's all upside the reason i don't go
out and get a yacht is because there's
actually a downside and generally
speaking for our clients this downside
is a little bit of a blind spot so as a
coach what our goal is going to be is to
like elevate this conflict to their
conscious mind help them work through it
use evidence-based techniques like
motivational interviewing to help them
get past some of their hurdles and then
ideally like help them move in the right
be
right direction by clarifying their
intent
any questions about that
okay
so now what we're gonna do is talk about
resistance so remember that um
when we kind of think a little bit about
our equation of motivation and how to
motivate people it starts
make sure that this is fixed
this over here and i got a
screen share with y'all
okay
then i gotta switch to this we good can
everybody see now
okay
so this is intent
this is resistance
and then this is action
so this is the first thing the first
reason why resistance is important
so clients will come to us and we'll say
i know what i need to do i just can't do
it like i'm i'm too lazy like they'll
look at the action over here and then
they'll use terms like lazy
or undisciplined
or unmotivated
but these are all umbrella terms they're
not like precise things that are
happening within us right so like even
if i'm lazy i may study for a test on
one day and i won't study for a test
on a different day
so it's kind of interesting because
behavior isn't consistent and so what
happens is like people come up with
these terms because they
look at their insides and they struggle
to do something and they look at someone
else's outsides they observe someone
else's external behavior without
understanding their internal conflict
and then they compare their insights to
other people's outsides and they they
end up with these terms lazy
undisciplined unmotivated
since these are umbrella terms and not
real things
what what that sort of means is that
they're they're defining their problem
in a way that is unactionable right
because like what do you do if you're
born with the lazy trait you just suck
so there are you know there is evidence
for example that based on the five
factor personality model that some
people are more conscientious than other
people so we're not saying that this is
um that there is
there's no such thing as lazy but i
would say that for ninety percent of the
clients that i've worked with who
describe themselves as lazy maybe even
more than that
it's not that they're lazy or
unmotivated it's that their motivation
is in a different direction from where
they want it to be and there's a process
that like you know you can use to sort
of uncover someone's motivation uncover
someone's discipline and like help them
be less lazy
so what really gets in the way is
resistance okay so what's y'all's
experience of like resistance with a
client do you guys like know what that
means
like how would you know if a client is
resistant what kind of stuff would you
hear them say
very good so let's start with the signs
of resistance how do we detect
resistance i want to
comma but dot dot dot
what else
how do you detect resistance in a client
it's hard
excellent what else
i can't
very good
what else
very good i'm not that
oh it's not possible
very good
what else
i don't know how very good
i don't know if this like it's but
sometimes you can see it on my face it's
like
i don't know
great great
okay
yeah so let's that's excellent so
let's think about so then you kind of
ask like what's that a right so what do
you think what else y'all are doing
fantastic by the way
hello
um
oh no sorry streamlabs was muted
okay
it's unmuted now
let me uh coaches can you have a call oh
i understand what's going on now
no they're fine it's because
they're picking up stream labs is
picking up my speakers
oh like they're just like not
okay
i i think i figured it out should be
fine now
can i say something test okay one two
three it's not possible
great we good
okay
okay so i'll give you all a couple
others okay there's no point
and then we get to some subtle ones
it won't be enough
okay
it'll be a waste of time
if it doesn't work
how do i know
it'll work
you all see this
uh another one so you said i
i can't but i think another kind of
manifestation of this is like
i'm different
from other people
with this problem
you all heard that one
like other people may be able to fix
this but i can't
because i'm different
so let's kind of think about
so let's actually start by kind of
outlining today so here's you know our
first thing is to remind us of our
general model the second thing we're
going to talk about is signs of
resistance which we've just done
so like you know there's something
that's driving this statement the third
thing that we're going to do is try to
figure out where does this resistance
come from so what's the origin of
resistance
um and then as we sort of highlight the
different origins of resistance so it's
going to be manas
ahamkar
okay
then we're gonna sort of teach y'all a
little bit about how to manage
these different things so how do we fix
these problems in people
okay so coach interventions
and remember that the the key goal of
this this kind of curriculum and this
teaching is not necessarily to give you
all techniques you'll always certainly
see those in the manuals and stuff i
think this kind of explicit knowledge
can certainly be useful right so once
you all know what resistance looks like
explicitly it'll help you pick it up
more easily
but to help you develop a good
theoretical framework so that when
someone comes in with a unique problem
that we haven't prepped you for you
understand the principles of the game
okay
and so the other key thing to remember
here is that i would say that
resistance is the most important
contribution that you can make
like clients are pretty good i think
clients can be good at figuring out
their own intents you can use uh
processes like journaling and stuff like
that to figure out your own intent
you can even use like tips like action
planning and like tips for you know how
to set appropriate goals i think those
are pretty um you know accessible for
self work
part of the reason that we emphasize
resistance so much for coaches is
because this is the thing that it's the
hardest for clients to do on their own
and the reason for that is this is what
their thought process manifests as
but this is not the problem right this
is the manifestation of the resistance
which is actually coming from these
three things
so i'd say resistance is the biggest
blind spot for our clients and therefore
you are the best at sort of fixing it
so let me ask you all something have you
all ever tried to play chess against
yourself
yes
yeah how does that work super difficult
what's hard about playing chess against
yourself
because you know the other players moves
exactly right so like how much can you
learn how much can you discover new
things about playing chess through
playing chess against yourself versus
playing against a different person
you're limited by your own perspective
so it's really hard to discover anything
new
and this is why
coaching like so this is why the main
value ad you have is in resistance
because you can sort of figure out
intent on your own you can figure out
actions and goal setting on your own
but
discovering your own resistance is like
playing a game of chess against yourself
because it's the same mind that's in
conflict you guys get that there's like
if we look at the resistance i want this
right that's me being white in terms of
the chess pieces right so that's me
playing on the white side of the board
and then there's the black side of the
board but the second i spin that that
chess board around and start playing
from the opposing viewpoint it's
actually one mind that's like generating
both of the move sets so discovery
becomes very very hard and like tricking
yourself
in chess is like really hard because you
know exactly what the other person's
thinking all of the thoughts are coming
from the same place so it's very hard to
make a discovery
so if y'all take nothing else away from
the training really try to focus on
today
in the importance of today because as
coaches the whole point is that you are
able to recognize your clients blind
spots you're able to decipher these
things which they're not going to be
able to decipher within themselves and
part of this is you know there's good
science behind this as well so these
also include things like cognitive
biases
right so this also includes things like
schemas from cognitive behavioral
therapy
um so like i'm different from other
people is a cognitive bias
i can't is a cognitive bias there's no
point is a cognitive bias and it's
really hard for human beings to see
their own cognitive biases they may be
able to see them after a fashion but
it's not really like
it's not a true sight i don't know how
else to put this like you know when
you're when you're playing chess against
yourself and you do something sneaky
you can even tell yourself in your mind
i'm gonna pretend like i don't know what
the other half of me is doing have you
all ever done that when you play chess
against yourselves like you're gonna
pretend
right you're gonna be like okay like i'm
not gonna detect that right away because
if i was playing white in this situation
i wouldn't see what black was trying to
do
so i'm going to like let black i'm going
to kind of bait myself into it i'm going
to let myself fall into the trap so
people can kind of recognize their
cognitive biases in the same way on some
intellectual level they can recognize it
they can recognize it from an explicit
memory standpoint
right
they can sort of understand it
informationally but they can't
understand it implicitly they can't get
neon of it
because it's all coming from the same
mind
okay
so now
are there any questions about that
okay so y'all are pretty familiar you
all feel pretty good about like
recognizing signs of resistance or do
you think we need to talk more about
that
i'm pretty comfortable okay great so now
let's try to think a little bit about
where does this resistance come from
um there's a question in chat so
self-coaching is impossible even with
awareness you all see like this is a
classic example so i'm not saying it's
impossible
i'm just saying it's
way harder
and the second thing is just the fact
that this person so this is what happens
right so
people will amplify
certain things and like ask the question
about whether it's impossible like do
you guys see that there's like there's
like even in that question there's like
a drive i don't know how else to put
that do you all see what i'm saying
like do you guys get those kinds of
questions so who can explain what's
going on behind that question
there's like a hopelessness like it
won't work for me
like do you mean that like this won't
work for me
yeah so it can be that way but what i'd
sort of guess from that that person's
perspective is that they're resistant to
engage in coaching and they're like
asking for a yes or no question that
will give them license to not try
coaching you all see that
right because like i'm not going to say
it's impossible they're like okay great
so i can do it like i don't need
coaching easy i can do it on my own
right so it's so interesting how
people's
questions like can even be a sign of
resistance
um anyway so let's i'm gonna try to
ignore chat so let's kind of move on so
where do you guys think this
resistance comes from let's move on to
step three
origins of resistance
and i know i've sort of given you all
the answer but let's kind of walk
through it
so where do you all think these
statements come from
some scars
okay what's the sum scar
undigested emotion
okay so like
yeah
okay maybe from like a past experience
okay past experience
so help me understand how past
experience leads to one of these
statements
well if it happens before then your mind
will predict that it'll happen again um
and then you feel less likely to succeed
maybe
okay so which one of these statements
eli what do you think would come from a
past experience or some stock
um i think maybe like it'll be a waste
of time or how do i know if it'll work
perfect right it'll be a waste of time
because they've had a past experience
where they tried something
and it didn't work and therefore their
brain logically concludes
right because like our brain is pretty
smart if i try to reset my sleep
schedule
three times and i fail after 24 hours
all three times what is my brain gonna
tell me i can't reset my sleep schedule
i'm different from other people other
people can reset their sleep schedule
but it'll be a waste of time for me
and therefore they stop trying that's
the resistance and they never act
excellent
so and remember that undigested emotions
so i think some scars and past
experiences go hand in hand right so
what tends to happen with the some scar
how does it what's the relationship
between a past experience and a some
scar who can explain it
it builds an identity
okay so we'll get to identity in a
second
so what's the relationship between past
experience and some scar
so some scar would be the emotion
associated with the experience compared
to the past experience like it could
also just be a pattern that the brain
has picked up on
excellent right so this is what happens
we have past experience
i got dumped
and that comes with emotion
and then what happens is after i get
dumped i distract myself
i'ma play a game i'm getting hammered
and then that emotion goes dormant
and then what happens
is our brain our buddhi
scans the
present and the next time i get into a
relationship it's like hey we've done
this before you remember what happened
last time and then i engage in the
relationship
some scar activates
and then the emotion returns
and then even though i'm dating someone
new
i feel
like i'm gonna get dumped
and then since i feel like i'm gonna get
dumped
i'm gonna say
um let's think about how that would
manifest
i don't know if this relationship is
going to work even though i want it to
work and i like the person i'm dating
right
and what's driving that is this emotion
that returns we good there
and so then what happens is each
experience so we can have experience
number one experience number two and
experience number three and each of
those will elevate the negative emotion
and over time the sum scar will become
very strong and then i'll never date
again
okay and so that emotion kind of returns
very good
so let's talk um so y'all can kind of
see that like
you know what do you think are the
emotions that relate what do you think
are like let's list out the emotions
that relate to these statements so what
do you think that our clients feel
that cause them to be resistant to
taking action
here
excellent what else
hurt
yep
shame
excellent
what else
pressure embarrassment
pressure yeah embarrassment what else or
doing great
there's more come on
guilt yep
alienated
yep
good appreciation
yeah now we're getting there
there's a valence of emotion that y'all
just scratching the surface of
what else
what's in the frustration bucket
powerless yeah
what else
hopelessness good
defeated
sure
resentment
what would you say
lonely
lonely absolutely
resentment
anger
right there's a lot of that stuff in
there
and so here's the thing
especially for our population that's
relatively lexa-thymic they're not going
to be aware of this
like when they think about let's say i
want to become financially independent
move out of my parents house
this is not what they associate that
goal with
but if i want to move out of my parents
house
that means that i'm living where
and if i'm living with my parents at my
age what emotions come with that
shame
absolutely right all of the above
and so the challenge is that you know
they look at the goal right and they're
like oh yeah like i want to move out
i'ma be independent like it's going to
be so great
but
there's no point
i've tried it
before okay other signs of resistance
i just need to figure out
this is a big one
right i just need to figure out i'll be
ready when
when oh i'll ask this person out after i
lose 20 pounds
i'll apply for a job when i've had
something
reasonable to put on my resume
you know i want to take this course
before i do this
right these are all signs
sorry where would we put the idea of
like
not willing to start until there's a
guarantee of success
beautiful we'll get there
okay right so did we not get there at
all
okay
yeah i'll i'll be ready i'll stick it
with i'll be righty when
okay so and let's just talk about that
for now so i you know i'll i'll i'll
apply when i'm sure that my application
is perfect
so what are we trying what is that
person like
where what's the emotional valence like
how does that work why does someone say
that to themselves and what's going on
emotionally in that person
i would imagine that they predict like a
there'd be a really strong negative
experience if it didn't work out so they
want to make sure that it does work out
to avoid that
exactly
well said right in a nutshell
so i cannot afford to feel the negative
consequence of the rejection
therefore i'm gonna stack the deck in my
favor to make sure that i don't get hurt
it is avoidance of emotion
motivates
our clients
to
stay
stuck
okay this is a key concept which i think
you'll all already understand y'all get
that
so like it's kind of interesting so now
we understand like the origin of
resistance is absolutely this negative
emotion
but like
they're highly motivated to do nothing
right so we have to understand that as
coaches
that this is not someone who's lazy
they're actually quite dedicated
you know like you have to you have to
work really hard and you have to you
have to emotionally suppress
a lot of shame to keep playing video
games all day long when you're like 26
and going nowhere in life
i had an interesting so i run a group
for esports professionals
and one day we had this kind of random
tangent
but like we were talking about like
toxicity in pub games
and like i don't know if you guys are
kind of familiar with this but like you
know if you watch like streaming and
stuff and you watch like pro gamers who
stream
they're like you know let's say like the
top tier pros or like maybe the 100 best
players in the world
but then there are people who will play
who will be like rank like 200 to 600
and just imagine what it feels like to
be like a rank 200 person
right you've dedicated 10 years of your
life you're one of the best 200 people
in the world
and you never go to even a tier 2
tournament
and like what does it feel like to be
that person
and so it's kind of interesting because
you know when when we're trying to
understand like the toxicity of those
players like understanding what their
internal emotional state is like makes
so much more sense
because like you know what what's their
prospects for the future like they don't
really have much right if i've spent if
i'm i've had i'm i've if i've been
playing dota for about 10 years
and i'm trying to go pro and i haven't
made it yet like what is gonna happen
you know so i think that a lot of times
if you think about people like our
clients who feel really stuck and by the
way stock doesn't necessarily have to
mean living in your mom's basement right
so stock can mean like
being in a relationship that you don't
think is the right one for you but
you're afraid to leave because you're
afraid that this is the best it's gonna
get
so you try really really really hard to
make this relationship work even though
all the signals are saying you should
gtfo
but you're not sure if you can find
someone else that can be resistance
resistance can be like successfully
having like a good job where you make
six figures a year
but
you're not really happy on a day-to-day
basis and you feel burnt out and you're
not really sure like how to make a
change in your life
you know and you kind of spend your days
looking at instagrams of people who have
quit their job and traveling the world
but you don't have the balls to do it
you know because that would be stupid it
would be throwing away everything that i
built
sometimes in our content creator program
we'll get streamers who need to take a
break and can't take a break
have you all anyone here from content
creator program
yeah so steve have you encountered that
yeah i've had a couple creators who
very much fall into that basket of like
i'm not allowed to have
bad feelings because i'm a successful
streamer right i'm not allowed to take a
break because
i made it and if i leave i'll never be
heard from again
right so if they're not allowed to have
bad feelings where do those feelings go
steve
when they have bad feelings
uh
they they get turned into some scars
absolutely and then some scars do what
in terms of their life how does it
affect their life
uh it recurs and grows over time and
makes everything harder so what
absolutely so that's that's the key
thing so like this crap is there you've
purchased this crap by your actions and
your circumstances
and then the more that we suppress it it
goes dormant and then manifests as
resistance
shows up looking like this
and the interesting thing is that if you
look at these statements there's no
emotion in these statements
right
i want to but uh it's hard i can't
it's logical here are all of the reasons
why i can't let me use logic
i'm a different kind of person that
applies to other people but not to me
once again logic it's not possible logic
logic logic logic logic logic
but buried beneath it is emotion and
these people stay stuck because these
beliefs the the energy that drives these
beliefs is purely emotional
okay
so it could be some scars emotions
you know so this is one of the key
origins of resistance now let's talk
about a hum god
so what is a hamkar
the sense of i right
oh [ __ ]
so
what happens over time
is as we develop negative experiences
and among us
we develop an ego that actually protects
us from our negative emotions so
remember that the ego is the bouncer of
the mind so when we feel an insecurity
what does the ego do
what are the signs that the ego is
active
comparison put other people up
very good
comparison
what else
maybe like logic or over explaining
yep
uh so i'm gonna call it bullying buddhi
so we'll explain that in a second
um
gets bullied
what else
or let's just i guess let's talk about
that now so remember that when someone
is egotistical
they will take their intellect or their
logic and they'll bully it into crafting
a logical story that supports their
viewpoint
so we see this all the time in politics
we see this all the time in terms of
like psychological defense mechanisms
right like people will jud like
justifications and rationalizations are
good examples of this in like western
psychology so oh yeah it's not my fault
that i cheated on my partner my partner
wasn't emotionally available to me so
what choice did i have
right it's a rationalization i didn't do
anything wrong they drove me to do it i
had no choice
and if you try to logically argue with
that person you won't get anywhere so
the tricky thing about the home guard
you can also see this all over the
internet like you look at any argument
on the internet my favorite is like
looking at when you have these like
people arguing about like strategies and
games and like they'll say like oh this
is a dumb idea
and they'll just like argue against each
other for until the end of time
and usually like one of them's an idiot
they'll never recognize it and then you
could tell by the down votes because
like one person has like a bunch of
upvotes and one person has a bunch of
down votes
right so you could see this this
attitude all the time where everyone
believes they're logical but it's
actually their ahamkada that's bullying
their intellect
into
you know presenting something that they
believe is logical
what else does the
uh hum guard do
there's one more thing
what do noobs on the internet do when
their logic is refuted
put themselves up put others down
absolutely right
so pump
themselves up
when i say something stupid on the
internet
and someone and i don't have a logical
leg to stand on
i'll be like 1v1 mid let's go noob
what are you one kmmr i'm 2k mmr i'm 1.1
kmr who the hell are you like shut the
hell up
i'm so much better
right put other people down
so we also see this in esports in a very
interesting way so sometimes we'll have
a team who's an underdog
and the underdog knows that they're an
underdog so what do they do
they start ramping themselves up in
their mind and like
crapping mentally on the team that
they're about to play against
it's kind of interesting so they'll be
like oh like they're not that great he's
not all that we're better they're worse
and instead actually what leads to the
best outcomes is not doing that
self-psychological like psyching up
process but acknowledging hey this team
is better than we are
we're not favored in this matchup but if
we play our best game we can actually
win
it's going to be an uphill battle
and generally speaking we see the best
performance when teams adopt that
attitude and remove a hum card from the
equation
okay
so
we can also see this
um
so which of these statements comes from
ahamkar
i've tried
okay i've tried this before
i'm not that
yeah this is the big one right what else
not possible
uh okay
sure
so here's what i'd say if you just look
at the subject
right so like some of these
like some of these include i
i'm different from other people i'm not
that
and some of these are like externally
pointed
right there's no point now this may be a
hum car too because if i view myself as
a failure
then there's no point
you'll see that so this is good i mean
the truth is that any of these
statements can be coming from manus or
ahmgar and remember that the two
intertwine right it's not like manus or
hamkar time you have negative emotion in
the monastery is going to activate so
the two play hand in hand
but in short sometimes what's going to
happen is our clients will have a sense
of identity that prevents them from
acting
and what do i mean by that um
or do you all understand what i mean by
that what do you all think
like they've maybe built a construct of
themselves that doesn't align with them
succeeding
absolutely that's beautifully put right
so this is the kind of thing where like
oh disciplined people could do this
but i can't do it because i'm not
disciplined and as long as they have
that belief there
their likelihood of success is going to
be very very low right so this is why
like you'll have these like you know
feel good success blogs that's like have
faith in yourself
you know develop confidence in yourself
like if you look at like you know pick
up or or red pill kind of stuff right
they're like you got to present
confidence because like women are
attracted to confidence just be
confident bro here's how you become
confident
you know so it's sort of this idea that
like the who we are factors into our
perception of success and so we have a
part of our brain that basically does
this calculation which is like you know
gain
minus loss
times
percent
of success
so this is a an equation that our brain
is running all the time
and so like what happens is if i have an
identity that views me as a failure and
this number goes down
my motivation is going to be very very
low
right
so
these are the two major sources or three
major sources of resistance so now the
question becomes how do we help clients
with manas and a hum god
or some scott and ahm god
what's our plan just a quick question
for the gain minus loss equation does
that equal motivation or resistance
um
that's a good question let me think
about that
i would say like this is this
calculation results in action or
inaction
is what's on the right side of the equal
sign
uh i'd say it's like percent likelihood
of action
i may need to
um redeem myself tomorrow once i think
about it
but i think that's what we're talking
about
i think it should be fair
does that make sense to y'all
was that a mistake
the likelihood of action i think is what
we're talking about here
okay
so
what do we do
with mana samskara
how do we
how do we manage these as coaches
i'm thinking maybe with the modest you
can change their
perceptions of like each of those
variables
okay very good right so the first thing
that we can do is when you say change
their perception i'm going to divide
that into two pieces one is we can
uncover emotion
right so their perception
is like this statement
so in order to change their perception
what we have to do is uncover the
emotion and once you've uncovered the
emotion then you can start to metabolize
it
right so this is what we call emotional
catharsis
it's what we call the aha moment
as well that's maybe more neon but the
two go hand in hand
so like and this is also where things
become implicit memory
from a scientific perspective
and when they become nyan from a
spiritual perspective
okay
so uncovering emotion is the first step
the second thing that we can do is
redirect their neuronal pathway
so what i mean by that
is our neurons tend to
form grooves almost like game trails so
there's a there's a saying in in
neuroscience that neurons that fire
together wire together
so generally speaking human beings will
have like scripts running in their mind
right so when i like play a game of dota
for example
i will like automatically do particular
things and that's because my brain is
like it's run this script before
and even when it comes to motivation and
goal setting and taking action our brain
is running these scripts
oh i'll do it when i'm ready
how do i know it'll work
it'll like run into this auto script
and as we uncover awareness of the
emotion and start to metabolize it
we can red redirect their thinking in a
more positive way so instead of like
every day they wake up and they think oh
i should study today i should study a
day and those neurons become like well
grooved and will start to like become
easier and easier to access those
thoughts and so the analogy that i like
to use is a game trail so imagine that i
have a field of like wheat like
high grass okay
so once a deer walks down that high
grass and then it starts to like form
like a very small pathway the next day a
different deer walks by and it looks at
all the tall grass and it says oh there
seems to be one spot that's a little bit
trampled so it walks down that way as
well
third day a third deer comes by tramples
the grass a little bit more and now
suddenly the grass has been trampled so
much that a rabbit can even walk down it
you don't have to be a deer and then a
field mouse and then lots of animals
start to use the game trail and so over
time
the way that we start thinking becomes
more and more solidified
so by using questions and reflections
we can take a stuck client and get them
to think about things in a new way oh
maybe the reason that you're not able to
do it isn't because you're incompetent
it actually has to do with like you have
an immense amount of shame that is
holding you back it's almost like your
brain is trying to protect you from
being hurt because every time you've
done this before you've gotten
absolutely destroyed
so i could totally see why you wouldn't
want to do it again
and oddly enough that interpretation and
sort of helping people like reinterpret
their understanding
will actually redirect their neuronal
pathways and start to catalyze change
and y'all may have seen that in terms of
clients you've worked with where like
you know they come in with a certain
conception and this is the real
challenge with goal setting because like
they come in with a particular goal but
their goal is based off of this
statement
right it's based on this understanding
it's not based on this
and so oftentimes the goals that they'll
come in with this is tricky
need to be reworked to things that are
actually more appropriate and address
the obstacles that they face instead of
where they want to go and that's the
biggest problem with goals is that our
clients are here
they want to go here so they say
let's get here but what they ignore is
like what's the wall in the way because
the real goal is removing this
this is what's keeping you from getting
to you to where you want to go
so in terms of decompressing them on us
it starts by raising awareness
and uncovering the emotion metabolizing
the emotion so that that emotional
energy is not as strong and therefore
will decrease that resistance hump right
if this is the resistance hump once you
metabolize emotion
it goes from here to here and then it's
easier for them to do and when you fully
metabolize the some scar this is what it
looks like and then action is actually
very easy to obtain
and once people get to this state
this is why if you ask someone who's
highly motivated
they're not actually like super fired up
they just do it easily it's easy for
them
it becomes easy and this is what we see
with our clients when we metabolize
emotions as they come in one week and
they're like yeah i did it and it's like
what
how did you do it it was so hard for you
a month ago how did it become easy and
they're like i don't know
i just did it
i just realized so we see this in in
addiction recovery as well where you
know reasons to quit and there's a lot
of resistance
and then once we get the emotions down
here
what people will say is i just realized
i have to quit
one day i woke up and i knew enough was
enough
and so that process actually has like a
very real
neuroscientific psychological
spirit not really spiritual but really
neuroscientific and psychological
underpinning to it and this is
basically how it works questions about
that
yeah i have a question about the
redirecting neural pathways is that
something that kind of just happens
naturally over like reflective listening
and like do they just kind of like
naturally start to question their own
like belief system or like
yeah so it doesn't happen naturally
so if you just randomly like
reflectively listen
it's not going to be sufficient so this
is where asking
open-ended questions is important
so i want you all to understand this for
a second so here's our client
here's what they know
and kind of hears what they
and based on what they know
they're not able to achieve their goals
in order to achieve their goal this is
what they need to know
so our work as coaches is on this
barrier right here
so you ask like they're like oh yeah
like they come in you say okay why are
you stuck and they're going to give you
a bunch of answers
and then you're going to ask them an
open-ended question right you're going
to notice something you're going to
notice some kind of discrepancy we'll
get to that into that in a second then
you're going to ask them a question and
you're going to like extend them over
here and then this is going to be the
new barrier of their knowledge
and then you're going to ask another
important question and it's going to get
over here
right and you're going to ask another
important question and it's going to get
over here
and remember that reflective listening
can move you in this direction too
right so what's the like what's the goal
of reflective listening why do we
reflect if we listen
what does a client do after you do
effective reflective listening
maybe like whatever emotion they had
kind of gets amplified a little bit
absolutely right it uncovers stuff
right so
this barrier gets advanced through
open-ended questions and reflective
listening
and this is also why we sometimes ask
you you know like what will like
this kind of read my mind question but
when you have a client who's on the
brink of leaving and quitting coaching
what should you do
validate work like
sort of
that's not actually what i advocate most
of the time when you all feel that way
because you all have been doing that
don't isn't it don't we um throw what we
call like a hail mary absolutely so help
me understand why that's important brian
um well it's
kind of important because it's
we kind of like step out what we would
normally do as a coach and we kind of
like put everything like on the table
like and more or less we kind of like
step
not like review what we say but like hey
this is what i'm seeing and like here's
the situation and like we just like lay
it on them
absolutely right so what what what a
hail mary is
is they're right here and they're stuck
and coaching is not working for them and
what we're gonna do is like point this
out to them and it's almost like a
traumatic shift
and it's like hey so in the past i
understand that coaching is not working
for you
and that you want to quit
so in the past
when things aren't working for you
is your usual response to quit
this is precisely why you can't quit
because every time when things don't
work out you don't persevere and you're
just doing it again
right their interpersonal pathology
they'll bring into coaching
and so that's your opportunity to say
that like look i know this hasn't been
working i'd like to work on it i'd like
to figure this out and if you're with me
i'm confident that we can do it
and i can see why you're concerned like
i can see why you're complaining because
i haven't done the best job maybe i
should have been doing this maybe i
should have been doing this and at the
same time like you're asking me for
suggestions and i'm giving them to you
and then you don't actually try them and
then you conclude that it isn't working
so like what do you want to do at this
point if you want to quit you're more
than welcome to like i'm seriously like
maybe it's not a good fit
but i really like here's what i'm seeing
in terms of your patterns and what you
tend to do and so you kind of like lay
it all out there you kind of toss out a
hail mary and usually so then it sort of
happens it's like the testing moment
either either you catch the pass and you
score a touchdown or it fumbles and
they're gg'ed out
but remember that our job as coaches is
to help them
not keep them there and so sometimes
desperate times call for desperate
measures and if you need to throw a hail
mary you need to throw a hail mary
okay but generally speaking our goal is
to you know use these techniques to help
them understand
you know how emotions are actually
controlling them
and then once they understand how
emotions are controlling them they then
they can start to work on it and then
their chance of like engaging in action
goes up
does that make sense jake
okay
so um i recognize that we started late
today it's 12 15. so if you all need to
step out you're all welcome to otherwise
i'll try to wrap up in 15 minutes is
that cool
okay
so now let's talk about a hump car so
i'll kind of speed run this a little bit
so as you all have already said as
people pile up with emotions what they
end up doing is forming identities of
themselves
and oftentimes this identity destroys
their motivation
right so like in cells are a good
example of this
where if you think about the in-cell
identity there are all kinds of things
about the identity that like
protects people like do we form this
identity for a reason
okay so like other examples are like
people with a victim complex
right so this is another protective
identity
because if i'm always the victim and the
world is a mean place and i'm dealing
with tons of you know like everyone's
being unfair to me
what does that protect me from
the emotions which ones let's be more
specific okay
the shame of i'm wrong
absolutely not even the shame
it protects you from i'm wrong
because if you're a victim who's at
fault
absolutely anyone but me
right so we can see like why people form
victim complexes
because they're incredibly protective
they're protect like you never have to
take responsibility as long as you're
the victim
you know i'm not saying that victim
victims don't exist like absolutely
people are victims
and this is the real challenge is that
even as a psychiatrist right like when
you're dealing with someone with trauma
it's really trickier if you're dealing
with someone with mental illness for
example so let's say like someone with
bipolar disorder
there's a very fine line
you have an illness do you deserve
compassion absolutely
do you deserve support absolutely do you
sometimes get a free pass from time to
time absolutely
but
do you get to blame
everything on being bipolar
no
and this can be very hard for people to
understand
do you get a free pass from time to time
absolutely oh it wasn't my fault i was
manic
and so i did a bunch of stuff like sure
like i can get that right people
literally can't control their actions
with their manic question is how did you
become manic in the first place
did you stop taking your medication did
you start using drugs did you stop
coming to therapy
so anytime there's kind of a victim
complex
you know we have to be kind of careful
because
if the victim is sort of saying i'm
wrong and it's uh i've been wronged and
it's not my fault what it also means is
that they're giving up their agency
they're giving up their control
so as a coach like for a lot of people
with a hum car you know we have to be
really really careful about
what they're giving up by adopting their
identity
and by pointing out to them that if you
are are doomed to be single you're
giving up any kind of power that you
have to like enter into a relationship
right so like in it's it's a seriously
it's a very hard line to walk as a
mental health professional in terms of
like what do you hold people accountable
for and what do you like give people a
pass on
you know a good another good example of
this is like people who lose their adhd
stimulant medication
it's like they're more likely to lose
their medication because they have adhd
and they're like impulsive and forgetful
and at the same time like sometimes
people are selling it because one bottle
can sell for like a thousand dollars
and so how do you know it's tough
the point is that they're going to form
some kind of identity based on their
experiences and as long as that identity
is where they're operating from it's
gonna color everything that they can try
it's gonna color their like calculations
about what's gonna happen
okay
so how do we
deal with a hum car any ideas
like what are some techniques that you
all have used to help people understand
like and overcome their omkar
meeting them where they are with
compassion okay good so meeting them
where they're at
right
what else
noticing when it's active or not very
good
noticing the activity what else
um understanding where it came from
excellent
understanding the origin
okay
so
reflecting it back
yep
excellent
okay so now we get to like
you know kind of practical questions so
like
who does this make you
so if you're trying to get
to the aham god in a very explicit
sense and show them this a hum god
how did you get to be like this
right so this is a really important
question that gets to understanding the
origin
point out the double standard
so
once again from our content creator
program
you all have content creators that never
want to take a break and can't afford to
take a break
and then you ask them hey so-and-so is
taking a break right now what do you
think about that i think it's awesome
they should do it
it's really important for their mental
health what do you think about you
taking a break oh no i can't afford that
right so you want to point out to them
like oh like there's a discrepancy going
on here
and so this is the key this is a key
technique in terms of like goal setting
is point out the discrepancy
right so you'll get that these are
open-ended questions which you all
already know how to ask
but as a coach when you're targeting a
particular thing and you understand what
you're targeting it should shape your
open-ended question it's not a random
reflective listening or a random
open-ended question you don't want to
ask an open-ended question over here and
then one over here you want to ask this
one then this one and then this one
and get them in the direction that you
need to go so in terms of meeting them
where they're at you don't ask this one
first you meet them here
you find the barrier of their
understanding
and you extend the barrier of their
understanding through like key questions
and like statements
and then you kind of focus on the
discrepancy right like
this could be important for goal setting
as well as like emotions in a humgar and
things like that you can ask questions
like how would your life be different if
what would be the advantage of dot dot
dot
what would it make you feel like if you
could
right the second thing that we're going
to do
is point out their reluctance
so i use the word reluctance here
slightly different from resistance so i
think resistance is something that we
understand
but reluctance is a better way to frame
things for your clients
because reluctance implies who's in
control
we are the coach
i was hoping the opposite so if you kind
of like think about
50 50. well done jake so i when i think
about reluctance right so like when i
ask the question what makes you
reluctant to go to the gym
in my mind maybe i'm wrong here right
because i screwed up ohm's law so it's
not like i'm right
so this could be some weird frame that
i've developed that doesn't actually
translate makes sense for other human
beings happens from time to time
but when i think about what makes you
reluctant to go to the gym it sort of
implies that the control is within the
client's hand
does that make sense
if not jake i'd love to hear your
perspective because chances are you're
right
i felt like
you're reluctant because like it's like
a dog that's like reluctant to move and
you're like pulling it like i'm leading
that's right
i see i see so i think that makes sense
so i think once again i think it's my
fault for not setting the stage properly
um
yeah that's why i'm sort of using a
different word because i think what
you're describing is resistance
so like if you're trying to take the
client somewhere and they don't want to
go there that's resistance
hence the whole point so i totally get
where you're coming from i think it's
basically you know the model that we use
is what you sort of said so what that's
why i'm sort of suggesting that y'all
change the word when you're talking to
the client
and you kind of use like what makes you
reluctant to go to the gym
because what you're sort of saying is
that ultimately it's within their
control
um it's the whole reason i'm introducing
a new term because i think it's slightly
different
so um
and so this is where you know as you
start to explore their resistance like
what makes you reluctant what would it
be like if you went to the gym
what would it feel like if you could go
to the gym how would you feel about
yourself
and then what does it feel like to not
be able to go to the gym
you know or do you really think
genuinely that you can't go to the gym
or you think that you could go to the
gym but something's getting in the way
so start to ask some of these questions
and then you know eventually you can get
to specific questions like you try to
figure out is this an issue of a hum god
or is this issue of some scott like i
want to go to the gym but the second i
step in the doors i get an overwhelming
sense of anxiety and i want to turn
around and run away that sounds more
like some scar
whereas because remember that the some
scar is the activity of an emotion that
arises in your mind like suddenly and
with a hum guard it's sort of a sense of
identity and then you can try to figure
out because each of those is going to
have a different approach if that sort
of makes sense one is going to be
combating the subscribe in the present
the second is sort of like if i believe
i'm someone who can never get healthy
you have to sort of
address that from an a hum car
standpoint
okay
um the other important thing here when
dealing with resistance
is
you need to be really focused on like
actions versus outcomes
okay so our clients will sometimes have
perfectionistic mindsets
and the perfectionistic mindset comes
from resistance
so what's going to happen if they like
have this perfectionistic mindset and
they try to do something
is that they're going to fail
and then it's going to destroy their
motivation
right decreases motivation
so what you want to try to frame things
as is like what i'd call the price of
tuition
right like emphasize that what we're
doing here working towards your goal is
like a long-term thing it's not a
success or a failure it's not even
binary
we'll we'll talk about this a little bit
more tomorrow but in terms of how to
frame goals
but that it's a long-term engagement
because it takes time to figure these
things out and this is where your
attitude as a coach is going to be
really important because this is one of
the things that we do as coaches that
you will not recognize that you are
doing and your client will not recognize
that you are doing but you are
absolutely doing which is modeling
behavior
so remember that just like we learned
slang your client is going to be picking
up things from you
so when your client sets a goal for
themselves and they fail and they come
in
and they feel like a failure and you
don't treat them like a failure
that's gonna start to rewire their
neurons
right so sometimes clients will get this
question how do i change my self-talk
and the answer is by listening to
someone else who like talks to you in a
different way so if we look at why why
do some people have negative self-talk
it's not like random
they have negative self-talk because
they were conditioned to have negative
self-talk they had emotionally abusive
parents who always blame them for
everything and so then they learned how
to talk to themselves like in a blaming
kind of way and so as a coach as you
model
a certain approach to failure they will
start to like pick up on that
and eventually what will happen remember
the goal of coaching is to have your
client no longer need to come and why is
that how does that work it's because the
process that you do with them they're
able to like do on their own
right so when you kind of when they come
in and they fail and you're like wow man
that sucks you're expressing empathy
you're expressing compassion hey by the
way you don't have to beat yourself up
i'm noticing that you beat yourself up
what's up with that where does that come
from
i'm noticing that i'm kind of wondering
because i've heard you kind of say
certain things you know do you sometimes
like are you surprised at all that you
failed
because i've heard you say some things
that would make me think that like you
were actually expecting to fail
that on some deep level like you thought
that you were gonna fail because you are
a failure what do you think about that
they're like oh [ __ ] i never quite like
yeah it's absolutely true but i never
realized that then you asked the next
question
if you actually believe you're a failure
and you expect to fail what do you think
that does to your chances of success
they're like oh my god
and then you've done something really
magical there
because what you've managed to do is you
managed to say that it's not you that's
being a failure it's your belief
that you're a failure that causes you to
fail
so i want y'all to answer this question
okay please get it right i am a failure
i believe
i
am a failure
which causes
me
to fail
what's the difference between these two
statements
one is a fact
absolutely what's the other one
there's like distance feeling like a
belief yeah
distance
emotion
right
this is it
when when your clients get distance
when the facts that control their life
become emotions
their life can change
huge huge impact
happens subtly happens slowly happens
because you model it
okay
so the next thing to kind of emphasize
is that when you're dealing with
failures
when you're dealing with clients who set
goals we want to focus as coaches on
patterns
not outcomes
okay so this is going to be one of the
ways that we kind of become action
oriented
but like asking your clients like what's
the pattern here
so i'll give you guys like a good
example of this right so someone says
okay i want to start eating healthy i'm
going to adopt a diet i did it for four
days and then i screwed up i couldn't
even last a week i failed gg i suck i
can't diet i'm undisciplined i'm lazy
right so what we want to notice is like
what's the pattern like what why were
you able to succeed for four days and
then what happened on day five what
happened on day four
so i am a failure
as you look at the pattern
oh like
um you know my mom called me and like
yelled at me because
you know she thought i was a terrible
person and on day five i ate whatever i
broke my diet or i stayed up late too
late playing video games
and i was like three in the morning and
i got the munchies
or my friends came over and we all got
high
and then i got the munchies
right so like as you point out the
patterns and things
this is important because the
responsibility of the success or the
failure no longer is in the person
it has to do with the actions or the
environment
and then what happens is as you guys
like point out these patterns instead of
oh you're just you're lazy and you suck
at life oh like that's interesting so it
seems like
you're able to diet fine unless you're
smoking pot
what do you think about that
and then what we kind of get to is like
then we're going to kind of enter the
realm of motivational interviewing
what's more important
dieting
or getting high
and then what you'll uncover is actually
getting highs more important because i
have anxiety
and so then what they're actually
choosing they don't realize this right
they're like oh i just suck
but what they're actually choosing is
dieting versus anxiety
or dieting versus
social interaction
and it's like well no wonder you don't
diet
and once you say that to them it's like
a light bulb goes off oh it's not just
because i'm an idiot it's like oh
there's an actual cost
and then you can work on clarifying the
intent and you can overcome the
resistance and then they'll actually die
right you can start to set appropriate
goals the goal is not to diet because as
long as your friends are coming over and
you're getting high there's no point in
dieting but this is what they do right
they focus on the goal they're like i
need to lose weight i need a diet and
then they beat themselves up when they
fail whereas they don't realize that the
reason they're failing is because
they're getting high and getting the
munchies
so if you really want to succeed what
you have to focus on is setting limits
around marijuana use and like seeing
those friends or you need to focus on
getting sober first
or what you want to do is conclude hey
i'm not willing to do that i
like my friends and i like getting high
so it's cool so then like let's forget
about dieting and then pick something
else that you want to work on
right and then if you say okay then
let's forget about dieting what are they
gonna do
they're gonna resist that absolutely
right what are they going to say
whoa whoa whoa no i want to do that
and then so when they say whoa whoa what
comes next
i don't want to give it up
whoa whoa whoa i don't
want
to
give
up
dieting
what the [ __ ] that's where motivation
comes from you have done your job as a
coach because they came in saying i want
to diet but i don't want to die
and now through this verbal jiu-jitsu
which is what most of like these mi
techniques are
they're telling you i don't want to give
up dieting hold on a second i'm not
ready to give up on that goal well
and and you know don't show them don't
show them that you've tricked them into
being motivated
gotta be sneaky
and then you're like wait
why don't you want to give it up
help me understand that oh clarification
of intent reinforcing stuff as they
start to voice and they start to tell
you well it's important to me because of
this this this all those statements are
going to build motivation
right what about dieting is important to
you because and this is where like it
all ties together desires
values
the pot is up here
what do you care about right and as you
have that conversation you're gonna move
them from here to here y'all see that
beautiful
okay
all right so the last thing that we're
gonna kind of end up with is remember
that this is a high-level kind of
principle
that your job as a coach is to be the
buddhi for your clients
right when they're in session with you
buddhi is going to be stronger than
manas and ahamkar
and generally speaking when we see
positive behavioral change it's when the
buddhi rises to the surface
and so this is where like we also go
back to like vidya versus neon
and then also like explicit versus
implicit memory
because as you're asking these kinds of
questions and pointing these things out
to them they're gonna be having like
revelations
and they're gonna they're gonna start
like you're gonna argue with them like
hey man i think you should stop dieting
because it seems like social interaction
and like hanging out with your friends
is really important to you they're like
no no i don't want to do that
and i'm like all right explain to me why
like is it social interaction important
to you yeah but dieting and blah blah
blah blah well if i diet like then i'll
be more confident dating
and so that then it kind of comes down
to and then you kind of like you know
lay out a specific goal which is you
know the next time your your friends
want to come over i think what you
really have to ask yourself is what's
more important to you
seeing my friends now are like
recognizing that i'm taking one step
towards
like
being confident myself so i can find a
romantic partner what's more important
to you as a person
and once you kind of
get down that track and you put the
choice to them you put the cost to them
they'll start to make the right choice
questions
going back to
um
one of the things in a hom car when we
were talking about reluctance
it sounded a lot like that was
reluctance is
where the barrier between what they know
and need to know is
yeah
uh i would say
so when i think about know and need to
know
i don't really think about reluctance i
think about that's your job as a coach
right so that's tha that's woody that's
the buddhi gap so when you talk to
someone like y'all may know this even
people who are like watching stream will
understand this that like
people can be stuck in from the outside
you can see exactly what they need to do
the problem is that if you go from like
where you are
where they are to where they need to go
they can't make that jump
right you just need to stop drinking
every day easy
then all your problems will be fixed so
that that knowledge gap is kind of where
you use reflective listening like there
may be resistance right there but as you
use these kinds of questions you'll
start to move them along the gap
the issue about reluctance is a way to
access
what their resistance is
and it's like a question that kind of
empowers them so the reason you want to
say like okay what's your reluctance
it's
asking that question is exploring that
barrier does that make sense
because they haven't really thought
about it
or what they've thought about is in one
direction but they missed something else
because generally speaking if they found
the right answer they probably would
have changed
right all of our clients have made
progress on their own in a thousand
different dimensions
and so if you think about
you know why do they get stuck in some
places and don't get stuck in other
places those are the places that they
need you as a coach to help them sort of
sort through
does that help
okay other questions
i was wondering when a client's kind of
going back and forth between like oh i
want to do something oh i don't want to
do something i want to give it up i
don't um is there any value in kind of
pointing that out to them that like
they're kind of flip-flopping between it
absolutely right so that's the whole
point of working with ambivalence
is so the value of that is first of all
there's like a lot of like shame right
so if i set a goal for myself and i
don't understand why i can't accomplish
it i end up beating myself up
it affects my ahamkar right if it
solidifies enough then i start to think
of myself as someone who's like an idiot
can't do anything
and then that in turn is going to affect
all my neuroscientific calculations of
success
and make me prone to not do it
so as you start to point out to them oh
there's like actually a good reason to
not diet right because like smoking pot
is like really important for your
anxiety as you kind of point that out to
them
there's a lot of subtle advantages the
first is that it'll break apart the
cycle of oh i'm i suck and therefore i'm
a failure and stuff like that so it'll
start to chip away at it because you're
not stupid it's just a choice between a
and b and we'll get to this in goal
setting in a second so human beings
respond a lot better to choices than
direction
so if you want a human to like choose
like to actually
do something it's good to make a choice
right if you want and we'll kind of get
to this where like if someone wants to
get in shape and you say
okay you need to go to the gym three
days a week that is actually science has
shown us research has shown us that that
is not as effective as asking someone
hey if you want to get into shape like
what do you think would be the most
effective working on your diet or
exercising and they'll say okay i think
some kind of exercise would be like the
best place to start okay
so if it's some kind of exercise do you
think it would be useful like do
something at home
or like would you want to like go
somewhere
and kind of just focus on exercise and
then you'll it'll be really interesting
because someone may say well i'll never
do it at home
so i should probably go somewhere
and if you have that same damn
conversation with that person and you
say hey i think you should go to the gym
they won't go
but if they come to it
through their own reasoning
because then if they say like oh i i
should go to the gym because i won't
exercise at home
and then you talk about going to the gym
and their social anxiety when they go to
the gym they've already set themselves
up for the advantage of going to the gym
so you're one leg up on the barrier
already because it's coming from them
does that make sense
if i went a little bit off track there
but i think absolutely playing with that
ambivalence is crucial
pointing out that negative pointing out
the cost
is very important
there's even an element of like positive
a hum god there
so when you sort of frame a question to
someone and you say
you know there's advantage for there's
option a or option b
and then on a given day if they choose
the right option
they start to build like a positive
sense of identity i'm someone that can
move towards my goals i'm someone that's
able to actually make a change in my
life because i made the right choice
i'm doing this because i care about it
i'm doing it because it's my duty i'm
doing it because it's my dharma and then
that actually builds their confidence
and then adjusts the the behavioral
action equation in the right way
okay
other questions
so let me summarize all right so today
we talked about resistance
so yesterday we covered intent which is
clarifying like the energy inputs or why
they want to do something and anytime we
try to do something there's going to be
like something that keeps us from
engaging in that action that's what we
call resistance we went over signs of
resistance like statements clients will
make which sound logical
but will be like self-defeating
statements that sort of signal to you
that they're not actually motivated to
act this is stuff like i want to but so
butts by the way are like a prime
example this is a great idea but you
know dot dot dot so i'm not that i can't
do that other people can do that i'm not
able to it'll be a waste of time what if
it doesn't work
you know
like i don't think i'm ready i'll do it
once
you know all of those are signs of
resistance so as you kind of hear those
statements start to dig into them
and as you dig into them you'll discover
that there's stuff going on in terms of
mana samskar or hamkar either it's an
identity that they've built up either
some kind of emotional block or some
kind of pattern that like they've
learned right where it's like triggering
in them and then they like have
difficulty engaging in the action
as you
uncover that stuff you're going to
extend the barrier of their
understanding you're going to point out
discrepancies you're going to point out
conflicts and in that process
you'll start to move them towards like
motivation they'll start to make
discoveries about themselves as they
discover some of these things what we
kind of went to you guys remember the
fact of i am a failure versus i believe
i'm a failure which actually causes me
to fail you'll start to move in that
direction so there's like neuronal
rewiring that goes on
as you start to do that kind of stuff as
you start to ask questions as you start
to extend the barrier of their
understanding as you start to model the
right kind of behavior
as you start to model inquiry instead of
judgment
then they'll start to actually naturally
move in the right direction and you'll
kind of get them primed to like set up a
right the right kind of goal in the
right kind of action
okay
questions
awesome so y'all are welcome to step out
we're gonna hang around for about 15
minutes
um i'm going to answer questions on
stream do you guys want to stick around
and answer questions
you'll want to step out i'm indifferent
by the way okay so questions from chat
okay
so oh what would a coach do if they ask
what's your reluctance and the client
says i don't know
first thought is what does i don't know
mean
but then that might also lead to an idol
now
so how would you how would you approach
that with a client jake when we say when
you say what does i don't know mean
help us understand what the different
things that i don't know could mean
sure so there's like confliction so like
i want to go to the gym or this and it's
like i don't know i don't know what to
do
um
the second is like i feel stupid if i
give an answer so i can't say anything
so
i don't know
um and the other is like they generally
just have no idea
yeah so that's a really important point
so like i don't know is a catch-all
phrase that actually means different
things the first is i don't know can
mean conflict so for example like let's
just use the example of like what do you
want to eat for dinner tonight do you
want thai or do you want pizza i don't
know it doesn't mean that i i don't know
like i don't it means that there's a
part of me that wants thai there's a
part of me that wants pizza
right the second thing the second reason
we say i don't know is because we're
judging our response
so like we're not happy with what we're
gonna say so we say i don't know
and then third thing that jake pointed
out is sometimes people just don't know
so i think it's exploring the i don't
know that then helps people know and
that's a prime example of the barrier of
understanding y'all get that
and then like once you clarify that like
oh they're like oh i'm actually
conflicted it's not that i don't know
it's that i have good reasons to want
both things
great um so how do i trust myself when i
keep failing my goals
i think this goes back to the idea of
like judging yourself based on the
outcomes
i mean
in the exact same situation we can argue
you're still trying
right if you have repetitive goals that
you keep attempting
then that's positive progress because
you're still attempting
right so there's a reframe there any
other perspectives how would you all
help a client who comes in and says how
do i trust myself when i keep failing my
goals so one option is like
you may keep failing but at least you
keep trying and if we really think about
who's more likely to succeed in the one
in the end the person who fails once or
the person who keeps failing
it's interesting right
i think oh i think i would explore like
how they're coming up with their goals
and like what makes them keep failing at
these goals and like
what makes them not trust themselves and
maybe try and reiterate what what goals
they have
right well said so it's exploring this
is it's all about extending the barrier
of understanding so here's the last one
that i i
end up with how do i trust myself when i
keep failing my goals
jake what are you thinking thinking what
i'm thinking yeah i'm i'm like why is
how much you trust yourself based on
like your whether or not you succeed in
the goal
great right so what's the relationship
between trust and failing and i'd even
go as far as to say that
what's the cause and what's the effect
do you keep fa do you fail to trust
yourself because you keep failing
or is it the lack and trust
the lack of trust you have in yourself
that causes you to fail
right so this we see a lot with clients
it's a self-fulfilling prophecy
and they confuse one with the other
do i do i believe i'm a failure because
i keep failing or do i keep failing
because i believe i'm a failure
and so that revelation can be incredibly
empowering for people oh crap
like
i'm setting myself up to fail
great answers by the way
um
okay
uh
i'm trying to find a good question
um
oh here's a good one should i get
coaching even though i should be getting
more professional help what do y'all
think
why not both
yeah other responses
i think steve has captured it but i'm
just curious if other people would like
to add to that
i i don't know exactly how i'd approach
this but i feel like they already know
what that is that they want to do i
point that out in some way
absolutely so what do you think this
person should do eli
what do you think they want to do
it's i'd say it seems like you want to
get professional help
so do you think they should get
professional help
yeah i guess if they think so
right yeah
so it's it's should i get coaching
there's a should
even though i should be getting more
professional help like there it is
there's the intent conflict
two shoulds in one sentence
right so it's like
the other question there is why don't
you get professional help
even though i should be getting more
professional help than like what's
stopping you from getting professional
help like what's up with that
you know
i love these questions because they're
they're really good examples of exactly
what we deal with in coaching so here's
another one how do i make my first
coaching session smoother
except that it's going to be awkward and
you kind of have to build a rapport
other responses great
i'm curious why they expect it not to go
smoothly
right
or why they expect it to go smoothly or
why it has to go smooth in the first
place
like think about this the first time you
do something like what's your
expectation about it going smoothly just
let it be rocky you'll figure it out
your coach will figure it out
why is it why is the responsibility on
you
to make your first coaching session
smoother you're the client you're just
supposed to show up if it's not smooth
that's the coach's problem
it's not on you you don't have to do
anything you just have to show up
right there they're the professionals
it's great
if i know my coach is doing verbal
jiu-jitsu on me will that change how i
respond to emotional interviewing
if someone knows that you're doing
motivational interviewing on you does it
change the way that you respond
no
we talked about that with the placebo
thing yesterday
yeah assuming there's belief there i
guess jake what do you think
um
yeah so i don't know how right this is
but i'm hearing like a bit of resistance
to the verbal jiu-jitsu so if you're
like realizing what's happening you're
like i'm not falling for this
yes
yeah oh go for it eli
i was gonna say like
kind of along what jake's saying that
like
noticing pointing out to them like oh
what is it that makes you want to resist
this you know like i'm trying to help
you or like this is the goal of this and
like what makes you want to resist it
sometimes you can get them to kind of
like throw themselves into it a little
bit too and say like oh here i am
resisting you i mean that can be really
helpful
so oddly enough like knowing the
techniques that your coach is doing is
not gonna negatively impact your
coaching experience in fact i don't know
if you all have had this observation but
like as clients learn to do what you do
how does that affect your coaching
relationship
it gets a lot smoother
is awesome
it's fantastic
right because now instead of the coach
doing it both of y'all are doing it and
you all are both working towards a
common goal so what i tend to find is
that
so i'll have clients when i work with
clients like a long time they'll select
start to say things like i knew you were
going to ask that question and then what
i find is that they're doing half of the
work that i was doing so we just moved
twice as fast it's actually great now
sometimes as eli pointed out there's a
resistance to it they're like ah
i'm not gonna let you trick me and it's
like
okay
so if you don't wanna work towards your
goals we don't have to
right it's not about trickery it's
really not and that's why we we explain
it in fact even if you look at group
coaching like what do we do the first
four weeks of group
we teach them how to do mental jujitsu
absolutely
right and what does that do once you
teach the group how to do verbal
jiu-jitsu
they practice on each other
yep and all of them know they're
practicing and i don't know if you all
remember but when we role play
right and you know that someone is doing
like reflective listening or open-ended
questions or whatever with you like you
still the real emotions still come out
right like i don't know if you'll
remember that but
so it still works it's kind of
interesting
um
all right so we've got time for one more
anything that y'all want to just share
or say
um
you don't have to well i'm digging for
another question but i just wanted to
give you all a chance to
share thoughts if you want to
yeah i mean i appreciate the additional
training like
just helping me so thanks
you're very welcome
um you know one thing i guess i would
say real quick is it seems like a lot of
the questions kind of have a lot of
it's like there's a lot of negative
anticipation of like what could happen
in coaching and i would say that in my
experience a lot of times that gets
dispelled pretty quickly over the course
of a few sessions
um
well said so i'm noticing that too
there's a lot of like
what if this happens and what if this
happens and like what if i i does it
like i need to make it smooth and like
you'll see that you guys see what eli is
saying it's it's a really good
observation that all these questions and
i don't think i'm maybe i'm selecting
for them
um but
you know i think there's a lot of them
um
okay last one
what do you do if you don't feel like
you're in control of your elec
reluctance
that sounds like something that coach
should help you work on
like that sounds like a person's taking
too much pressure
control is also a weird word to use
there
because we don't really control our
emotions
they just happen to us and then we
choose to engage with them or not
see that's that's the aha moment so like
you'll see in that question
it's a question that's setting you up to
fail because if you're like
no one's in control of their reluctance
if we were getting control of our
reluctance
we wouldn't be reluctant
right and so it's like teaching this
person that core concept that it starts
like there's nothing special like
if you're not in control of your
reluctance that's where everyone begins
right it's like that's perfectly
acceptable
and why are you trying to control it
it's how you react to it how you respond
to it
that ultimately is going to determine
your success or failure but if you're
getting caught up with beat not being in
control of it then you're like oh my god
i'm doing this wrong no you're doing it
just like every other human being who's
ever done it on the planet
but you get so caught up in the fact
that i'm not in control of my reluctance
that you don't actually learn how to
deal with it
so this is another thing that we kind of
do is more implicit at this point but we
sort of made it explicit early on in
terms of our coach curriculum
is that we're not trying to control
right we're trying to make choices we're
not trying to like
it's not like a win or lose or like
absolute control versus like that's not
how it works it's it's muddy it's messy
and once you kind of acknowledge that
once you actually surrender the idea of
control once you acknowledge that hey
i'm not in control of this and sometimes
the reluctance is going to win but
sometimes i'm going to win too
that's when you start to make positive
progress
okay last question how common is
resistance
uh universal
yep
yeah
i don't think i've encountered a client
without resistance
i don't know that i've encountered a
human without resistance
right so these are fundamental aspects
right so this is what
yeah i mean it's common so everything
that i think people are concerned about
i think eli pointed out well that you
know people are concerned about this
stuff it's totally fine these are all
valid concerns that i have and i think
we're
i i'm confident that y'all can handle it
all right so thank you all very much so
we're going to do
um goal setting
and how to take action tomorrow and
that'll kind of wrap up our goal setting
and motivation curriculum
um you know we'll probably have office
hours and case review times and things
like that so if you all have particular
questions uh you know you're welcome to
kind of bring them up there we'll try to
compile this stuff into a manual for
y'all as well that has a lot more like
details in terms of like exercises and
specific guidance
in terms of like you know almost like
line by line like
how to understand different kinds of
clients like different um some scars
that may be related to failure and not
trying and things like that as well as
um
particular dialogue trees that y'all may
find useful to help people achieve some
of these goals
all right so thank you all very much for
coming
and we'll see y'all tomorrow
you